[Someone sent this in from California, and we decided to extend
our campaign against information hoarding to recipes as well
as software.  (Recipes are the closest thing, not involving computers,
to software.)

The story appears to be a myth, according to the Chicago Tribune,
which says that Mrs Fields Cookies hoards the information completely.
Therefore, this recipe can be thought of as a compatible replacement.
We have reports that the cookies it makes are pretty good.]

Someone at PG&E called the Mrs. Fields Cookie office
and requested the recipe for her cookies. They asked
her for her charge card number, and she gave it to them
thinking the cost would be $15 to $25.  It turned out
to be $200!

Therefore, this person is giving the recipe to anyone
and everyone she knows (and doesn't know) so that
someone can get use of her $200.  Anyway, just keep
passing it on.

Cream together:		2 cups butter
			2 cups sugar
			2 cups brown sugar

Add:			4 eggs
			2 tsp. vanilla

Mix together in
separate bowl:		4 cups flour
			5 cups oatmeal (put small
 amounts of oatmeal in blender until it turns to
 powder.  Measure out 5 cups of oatmeal and only
 "powderize" that, NOT 5 cups "powderized" oatmeal)

			1 tsp salt
			2 tsp baking powder
			2 tsp baking soda

Mix:			All of the above

Add:			24 oz. bag of chocolate chips and
			1 finely grated 8 oz Hershey bar (plain)

Add:			3 cups chopped nuts (any kind)

Bake on greased cookie sheet (make golf ball sized balls) and
bake about two inches apart.  Bake at 350 degrees for 8 - 10
minutes. DO NOT OVERBAKE.  Makes 112.

From: ucdavis!lll-lcc!hplabs!parcvax!bane@ucbvax.berkeley.edu (John R. Bane)
Subject: Re: free cookie foundation?

Hi! I "stole" your very expensive cookie recipe off the net. If you
want to send me your SnailMail address, I'll be glad to send you a
dollar (I would like to suggest this to the net, but I think there is
some netiquette rule against asking for money - or is that only money
for oneself?) to help defray the cost (it's not much, but if EVERYone
who took the recipe sent you a dollar, it would help).

Here also is another cookie recipe which I'm very fond of.

Makes 6-8 dozen
Bake at 375 degrees for ~10 min.

Cream together:

1 cup shortening (I use Weight Watcher's Reduced Calorie Margarine!)
1/4 cup peanut butter (I recommend the non-sugared kind)
1/2 cup sugar
1/2 cup brown sugar
2 eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla

Add:

1/2 cup flour
1 teaspoon soda
1/2 teaspoon salt
2 cups rolled oats (I use the 5-min variety)
1-2 cups chocolate chips (I use 2 cups semi-sweet - ummmm!)
1 cup nuts (I use pecan pieces - don't get them crushed, or the extra
	    oil will make greasy cookies)
1 cup shredded or flaked coconut

(The nuts were listed as optional and I added the coconut myself, but
I really love them there! You could also add things like m&m's, or
raisins (I don't care for raisins in cookies, but you might).  I've
always wanted to try banana chips.)

Mix well. Drop by teaspoonfuls on greased cookie sheet (I use pam).
Bake at 375 degrees for approx. 10 min.

My aunt found this recipe in an Amish book called something like
"Eating Well When The Whole World Is Starving," and although I thought
a cookie recipe was a bit odd for a book like that, they are about the
healthiest a cookie is ever likely to get.

They are also very easy to make (no blending, sifting, rolling, etc.)
and extremely delicious.  I get rave reviews and recipe requests whenever
I make them.

				- rene

Chocolate Chip Cookies - Glamorous, crunchy, rich with chocolate bits & nuts.

Also known as "Toll House" Cookies ... from Kenneth and Ruth Wakefield's
charming New England Toll House on the outskirts of Whitman, Massachusetts.
These cookies were first introduced to American homemakers in 1939 through
our series of radio talks on "Famous Foods From Famous Eating Places."

Mix Thoroughly :
	2/3 cup soft shortening ( part butter )
	1/2 cup granulated sugar
	1/2 cup brown sugar ( packed )
	1 egg
	1 tsp vanilla

Sift together and stir in :
	1-1/2 cups sifted flour (*)
	1/2 tsp soda
	1/2 tsp salt

Stir in :
	1/2 cup cut-up nuts
	6 oz package of semi-sweet chocolate pieces ( about 1-1/4 cups )


(*) for a softer, more rounded cookie, use 1-3/4 cups sifted flour.


Drop rounded teaspoonfuls about 2" apart on ungreased baking sheet. Bake until
delicately browned ... cookies should still be soft. Cool slightly before you
remove them from the baking sheet.

Temperature:		375 F. ( modern oven )
Time:			bake 8 - 10 minutes
Amount:			4 - 5 dozen 2" cookies


=====

Personal comments :

I find it tastes better with a mixture of shortening and butter, as they say.

You don't need << all >> of that sugar, and it can be whatever color you want.

The nuts are optional. Feel free to play with the recipe. I put oatmeal in it,
reducing flour accordingly, and sometimes cinnamon.

I also find it useful to grease the cookie sheets.

I think I'm going to go bake some now ...

-- richard

